System Requirements
===================

Tramp has been used successfully on GNU Emacs 20, GNU Emacs 21 and GNU
Emacs 22, as well as XEmacs 21.  For XEmacs 21, you need the package
`fsf-compat' for the `with-timeout' macro.

For installation, it requires at least the following program versions:

  - GNU Autoconf 2.50 if sources are taken from CVS
  - GNU make 3.76
  - GNU texinfo 4.2

Tramp is part of GNU Emacs 22.  Tramp is available as XEmacs package.


Basic Installation
==================

The simplest way to build and install Tramp is:

  1. `cd' to the Tramp source directory.  If you've taken Tramp from
     the CVS sources, type `autoconf' in order to get an up-to-date
     `configure' script.

  2. Type `./configure --with-contrib' to configure Tramp for your system.

     Running `configure' takes awhile.  While running, it prints some
     messages telling which features it is checking for.

  3. Type `make' to build the byte-compiled Lisp files as well as the
     Info manual.

  4. Type `make install' to install the Tramp Lisp files and the Info
     manual.

  5. You can remove the byte-compiled Lisp files and the Info manual
     from the source directory by typing `make clean'.  To also remove
     the files that `configure' created, type `make distclean'.


Installation Names
==================

There are some Lisp packages which are not contained in older
(X)Emacsen by default yet.  In order to make a link for them into
Tramp's contrib directory, you must use the `--with-contrib' option:

	./configure --with-contrib

By default, `make install' will install the package's files in
`/usr/local/info' and `/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp'.  You can
specify an installation prefix other than `/usr/local' by giving
`configure' the option `--prefix=PATH'.

If your installed copy of Emacs is named something other than `emacs'
or `xemacs', you will need to tell `make' where to find it so that it
can correctly byte-compile the Tramp sources.

For example, to force the use of XEmacs you might do this:

	./configure --with-xemacs
	make
	make install

The syntax of Tramp file names is different for GNU Emacs and XEmacs.
The Info manual will be generated for the Emacs flavor choosen in the
`configure' phase. If you want the other version, you need to set the
option `EMACS_INFO' to `make':

	./configure --with-emacs
	make EMACS_INFO=xemacs

Also, the `--prefix=PATH' option to `configure' may not be general
enough to set the paths you want.  If not, you can pass variables to
the `make' command to control the installation.  For a complete list
of tweakable variables, look in the makefile.

For example, to put the Lisp files in `$HOME/elisp' and the Info file
in `$HOME/info', you would type:

	./configure
	make
	make lispdir=$HOME/elisp infodir=$HOME/info install

Running `configure' might result in errors or warnings.  The output
explains in detail what's going wrong.

In case of errors, it is mandatory to fix them before continuation.
This can be missing or wrong versions of `(x)emacs', (X)Emacs
packages, `make', or `makeinfo'.

Warnings let `configure' (and the whole installation process)
continue, but parts of Tramp aren't installed.  This can happen with
missing or wrong versions of `texi2dvi' or `install-info'.  Here you
can decide yourself whether you want to renounce on the related
feature ("tramp.dvi" file for printed output, Tramp entry in Info's
"dir" file), or whether you want to adapt your $PATH environment
variable, and rerun `configure'.  An alternative is calling the missed
parts manually later on.


Load Path
=========

If you don't install Tramp into the intended directories, but prefer
to use from the source directory, you need to add the following lines
into your .emacs (given "~/emacs/tramp" is your source directory):

        (add-to-list 'load-path "~/emacs/tramp/lisp/")
	;; for Emacs
        (add-to-list 'Info-default-directory-list "~/emacs/tramp/info/")
	;; for XEmacs
        (add-to-list 'Info-directory-list "~/emacs/tramp/info/")
        (require 'tramp)


Japanese Manual
===============

Thanks to Yoichi Nakayama <yoichi@geiin.org>, there exists a japanese
translation of the Tramp manual.  You can generate it applying the
`--with-japanese-manual' option:

	./configure --with-japanese-manual

This will result in an Info manual `tramp_ja'.


Suggestions/Bug Reports
=======================

Send all suggestions for fixes, etc to <tramp-devel@gnu.org>.
